# Node.js part 2

[See part 1](./2023-07-10-node-js-1.md)

## Http

Node.js uses c++ under the hood. It's a wrapper around c++ to use low level machine features in our servers (network, filesystem, etc), using the libuv library.

Javascript can save data and code and runs the code using data. Javascript provides some labels that allow us to interact with the c++ code and the machine. An example is `http` module. It helps us to set up an open socket and listen to incoming requests and send responses. `http` is the node.js module that allows us to indirectly modify the network through c++.

```javascript
import http from 'http';

const server = http.createServer();

server.listen(3000);
```

Node.js will call our javascript code whenever a request comes in through port 3000 and will add the arguments coming from the requests and execute our code.

Also it translates the incoming messages (strings in http format) to javascript objects and vice versa (request and response objects).

An incoming http message can contain a lot of information. The most important are:

- method: GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, etc.
- url: the path of the resource
- headers: metadata about the request
- body: the data of the request

```javascript
import http from 'http';

const doSomething = (req, res) => {
  console.log('request received');
  res.end('Hello world');
};

const server = http.createServer(doSomething);

server.listen(3000);
```

`http.createServer` is going to create the socket, store the function `doSomething` so it is set up to be called when a request comes in and finally returns a `server` object full of functions.

Then the socket receives a message, and node will parse the message and create a request object as well as a response object.

This objects get automatically passed to the function `doSomething` and then the function can use the request object to get the data from the request and the response object to send data back to the client.

The response object contains important information like the kind of information we are sending back (html, json, etc), the status code, etc.

## Error handling

The server can automatically run a function in the case of a client error, like an incoming http message which is corrupted.

```javascript
const http = require('node:http');

const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
  res.end();
});

server.on('clientError', (err, socket) => {
  console.error(err);
  socket.end('HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request\r\n\r\n');
});

server.listen(8000);
```

Another important event is `request`. It is emitted each time there is a request.

```javascript
const http = require('node:http');

const server = http.createServer((req, res) =>{
  res.end();
});

server.on('request', (req, res) => {
  console.log(req.url);
});

server.listen(8000);
```

Node uses the error-first callback pattern. The first argument of the callback is the error. If there is no error, the first argument is null.

## Streams

[Streams](https://nodejs.org/api/stream.html#stream_stream) are a way to handle reading and writing files in node.js.

```javascript
const fs = require('fs');

const file = fs.createReadStream('file.txt');

file.on('data', (chunk) => {
  console.log(chunk);
});

file.on('end', () => {
  console.log('finished');
});
```

Remaining batches of data are waiting in the callback queue to be processed. The [event loop](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Event_loop) will process them as soon as it can.

## Asynchronicity

Some important concepts:

- Call stack: where the code is executed.
- Callback queue: where the callbacks are stored.
- Event loop: checks the call stack and the callback queue and moves the callbacks to the call stack.

The global scope code is executed first. Then the event loop starts checking the call stack and the callback queue. If the call stack is empty, it will move the callbacks to the call stack.

There are several types of task queues (in order of priority):

- Timers queue: callbacks from `setTimeout` and `setInterval`.
- I/O callbacks queue: callbacks from I/O operations. Most of the callbacks are here.
- Check queue: callbacks from `setImmediate`.
- Close queue: callbacks from `close` events.

Promises are stored in another queue, the microtask queue. They have priority over the other queues.

[See part 3](./2023-07-14-node-js-3.md)
